Chapter 4 — Quick Reference
Estimated time: 15 minutes
This chapter is a condensed reference for everything covered in this guide. Bookmark it — most
engineers return to a page like this often, long after finishing onboarding.
Git Cheat Sheet
Command What It Does
git clone <url> Copy a remote repository locally
git status Show current changes
git add <file> Stage a file
git add . Stage all changed files
git commit -m "msg" Commit staged changes
git push origin <branch> Upload commits to GitHub
git pull origin <branch> Download and merge remote changes
git fetch Download remote changes without merging
git branch List branches
git checkout -b <branch> Create and switch to a new branch
git switch <branch> Switch branches
git merge <branch> Merge a branch into the current one
git log View commit history
git diff View unstaged changes
git stash Temporarily shelve uncommitted changes
git branch -d <branch> Delete a merged local branch
Problem-Solving Checklist
• Have I written a precise problem statement (expected vs. actual behavior)?
• Have I broken the problem into smaller, testable parts?
• Have I checked what changed recently in this area?
• Have I formed a specific, falsifiable hypothesis?
Engineering Essentials: Problem Solving & Git Fundamentals Onboarding Handbook
Page 26 of 31
• Have I tested that hypothesis directly, rather than assuming?
• Have I identified the root cause, not just a symptom?
• Have I verified the fix actually resolves the original problem?
Debugging Checklist
• Can I reliably reproduce the issue?
• Have I read the full error message and stack trace, from the bottom up?
• Have I gathered relevant logs around the time the issue occurred?
• Have I compared a working case to a failing case?
• Am I changing one thing at a time?
• Have I added a test to guard against this bug returning?
Commit Message Guidelines
• Start with an imperative verb: Add, Fix, Update, Remove, Refactor, Rename.
• Keep the summary line short and specific — ideally under 50 characters.
• Explain why the change was made if it is not obvious from the summary alone.
• One logical change per commit, rather than bundling unrelated changes together.
• Never commit secrets, credentials, or generated files.
Pull Request Checklist
• Title clearly summarizes the change.
• Description explains what changed, why, and how to test it.
• Change is scoped narrowly enough to review in one sitting.
• All automated checks (tests, linters, build) pass.
• Linked to the relevant ticket or issue, if applicable.
• No secrets, debug statements, or commented-out code left behind.
• Self-reviewed once before requesting review from teammates.
Key Takeaways From This Guide
The Short Version
Problem solving is a repeatable process: understand precisely, break it down, form a hypothesis, test it,
find the root cause, and verify the fix.
Engineering Essentials: Problem Solving & Git Fundamentals Onboarding Handbook
Page 27 of 31
Debugging follows the same discipline, applied to defects: reproduce, gather evidence, hypothesize,
test, fix, verify.
Git tracks changes through four areas — working directory, staging area, local repository, remote
repository.
GitHub adds collaboration on top of Git: Pull Requests, code review, and shared history.
A healthy day-to-day workflow is: pull, branch, change, commit, push, open a PR, review, merge, clean
up.
Clear commit messages and focused Pull Requests are a courtesy to your teammates and to your future
self.
Engineering Essentials: Problem Solving & Git Fundamentals Onboarding Handbook
Page 28 of 31
Final Summary
This guide covered two foundational engineering skills: structured problem solving and the practical use
of Git and GitHub.
In Chapter 2, you learned to approach unfamiliar problems methodically — defining them precisely,
breaking them into smaller parts, forming and testing hypotheses, and distinguishing root causes from
symptoms. These habits apply whether you are debugging a failing test, investigating a production
incident, or simply trying to understand a new part of the codebase.
In Chapter 3, you learned how Git tracks changes and how GitHub enables teams to collaborate safely
around a shared codebase — from cloning a repository and creating branches, through staging,
committing, and pushing changes, to opening Pull Requests, participating in code review, and resolving
merge conflicts.
Neither skill is mastered by reading alone. Revisit the exercises in this guide as needed, keep Chapter 4
close during your first few weeks, and do not hesitate to ask teammates questions — every experienced
engineer on your team was once exactly where you are now.
Next Steps
Apply the debugging checklist the next time you encounter an unfamiliar bug, even a small one.
Practice the full Git workflow — branch, commit, push, Pull Request — on a real or practice repository
until it feels automatic.
Ask a teammate to review your first few Pull Requests closely, and ask questions about anything in their
feedback you do not understand.
Engineering Essentials: Problem Solving & Git Fundamentals Onboarding Handbook
Page 29 of 31
Glossary of Important Terms
Term Definition
Branch An independent line of development within a repository, allowing changes to
be made in isolation from the main codebase.
Clone Creating a full local copy of a remote repository, including its history.
Commit A saved snapshot of staged changes, along with a descriptive message, that
becomes part of the repository's permanent history.
Conflict (Merge Conflict) A situation where Git cannot automatically combine changes from two
branches because they modified the same content differently.
Code Review The process of a teammate examining proposed changes before they are
merged into the shared codebase.
Debugging The process of finding and fixing the cause of unexpected or incorrect
behavior in software.
Fetch Downloading changes from a remote repository without merging them into
your local branch.
Fork
A personal copy of someone else's repository, hosted under your own
account, commonly used to contribute to projects you do not have direct write
access to.
Git A distributed version control system used to track changes to files over time.
GitHub A web-based platform for hosting Git repositories and collaborating around
them.
Hypothesis (in debugging) A specific, testable guess about the cause of a problem.
Local Repository The version of a repository, including its full history, stored on your own
computer.
Main (branch) The default branch of a repository, typically representing the stable,
deployable version of the code.
Merge Combining changes from one branch into another.
Pull Downloading changes from a remote repository and merging them into your
current local branch.
Pull Request (PR) A GitHub feature proposing that changes from one branch be reviewed and
merged into another, typically main.
Push Uploading local commits to a remote repository.
Remote Repository A version of a repository hosted on a server (such as GitHub) that team
members push to and pull from.
Engineering Essentials: Problem Solving & Git Fundamentals Onboarding Handbook
Page 30 of 31
Term Definition
Repository (Repo) A folder tracked by Git, containing project files and their complete change
history.
Root Cause The underlying reason a problem occurs, as distinct from its visible symptoms.
Stack Trace A report of the sequence of function calls that led to an error, typically shown
when an unhandled exception occurs.
Staging Area A holding area in Git where changes are placed before being included in a
commit.
Version Control A system for tracking and managing changes to files over time, enabling
history, collaboration, and reversibility.
Working Directory The files on your computer as you are actively editing them, before staging or
committing.
Engineering Essentials: Problem Solving & Git Fundamentals Onboarding Handbook
Page 31 of 31
Additional Learning Resources
Problem Solving & Debugging
• Practice explaining bugs out loud or in writing before fixing them — the discipline of articulating a
problem often reveals the solution ("rubber duck debugging").
• Review post-incident write-ups or retrospectives from your team, if available, to see root cause
analysis applied to real situations.
• When stuck, try teaching the problem to someone else, even informally — the act of explaining
frequently surfaces the missing piece.
Git & GitHub
• The official Git documentation and reference (git-scm.com) covers every command in this guide in
further depth.
• GitHub's own documentation (docs.github.com) explains Pull Requests, code review, and
repository settings in detail.
• Create a personal scratch repository and practice branching, committing, and resolving conflicts
without any risk to real project code.
• Ask your team whether they follow a specific branching or commit message convention beyond
what is covered in this guide, and adopt it early.
End of Guide — Welcome to the team.